---
marp: true
size: 16:9 
paginate: true
#footer: Week 04.01
---

# GEOG 432/832: Programming, Scripting, and Automation for GIS

#

## Week 04.01: Even more geoprocessing in Python 

### Dr. Bitterman

#

--- 

# Today's schedule

- Open discussion
- Announcements
- Discussion and exercises
- For next class

---

# Open discussion

---

# Announcements

- Schedule
- Syllabus updated

---


# Functions

- A function is a piece of code that performs a specific task.
- Geoprocessing tools are functions, *but* not all functions are geoprocessing tools.
- What else can functions do?
    - list datasets
    - retrieve properties
    - check for the existence/presence
    - validate names 

## What else have we used?

### *note, not all ArcPy functions are available as standard tools in ArcGIS Pro*

---

# Calling a function

- a lot like calling a tool (b/c a tool is a function)
  - has parameters (which take arguments)
  - returns values (assuming it returns)
    
The syntax of a function in ArcPy is the same as for tools:
```python
arcpy.<functionname>(<arguments>)
```

For example, this prints either True or False:
```python
import arcpy
print(arcpy.Exists("C:/Data/streams.shp"))
```
### *what is the data type of the value ```arcpy.Exists``` returns?*

---
# Many, many, many ArcPy functions
Some categories (not the full list - see text)
- ArcGIS Online/Portal
- Cursors
- Geodatabase admin
- Publishing
- Raster
- Spatial references and transformations

### *These categories won't be in the Python documentation. Go to ESRI.*

---
# Miscellany

- ArcPy functions are divided into 2 categories:
    1. tool functions
    2. nontool functions
    
Why do we care (a good question)?:

- Documentation is in different sections. Nontool functions are *only*  documented under the Python tab of the ArcGIS Pro help pages
- Tools are licensed by:
    - license level (Basic, Standard, and Advanced)
    - extension (e.g., 3D Analyst, Network Analyst, Spatial Analyst)

*(All arcpy nontool functions are available independent of the license level)*

- Tools produce geoprocessing messages, nontool functions do not

---
# Using classes to generate objects for tool parameters

So far, we have passed relatively simple parameters in our functions 
*For example:*

```python
inFc = "State_Park_Locations.shp"
clipFc = "lancaster_county.shp"
outputFc = "myFirstOutput.shp"

arcpy.Clip_analysis(inFc, clipFc, outputFc)
```

But parameters can be (and often are) more complex objects themselves

---

# Let's try this with the SpatialReference class

- Recall our discussion of object-oriented programming

## *What is a class?*

---

# Creating a new object from a class

Syntax:
```python
myVariableName = arcpy.<classname>(parameters)
```

An actual example

```python
import arcpy	
prjfile = "C:/Data/myprojection.prj"
spatialref = arcpy.SpatialReference(prjfile)
```
### Let's break it down... what does the above code block do?
- What is the name of the class?
- What is the name of the object we created from the class?

---
# What can you do with objects?

- Get work done!
- In our spatial reference example:
    - parameters of the CRS
    - domains
    - more

```python
import arcpy	
prjfile = "C:/Data/streams.prj"
spatialref = arcpy.SpatialReference(prjfile)
print(spatialref.name)
```
### *what does the above code block do?*


---

# Many parameters are Strings

The previous code prints the name of the spatial reference
```NAD_1983_StatePlane_Florida_East_FIPS_0901_Feet```

### *What is the CRS?*

- Any potential issues using a String representation of the CRS like this in your code?

- What does a .prj file look like? 
    - Open one in Notepad (or another text editor)

---

# Alternative to working directly with Strings   

 - Much easier to refer to CRS by using the name of the coordinate system or referencing the .prj file that contains the string value
 - Can do so using the SpatialReference class

For example, the synax to call Create Feature Class tool:
```python
CreateFeatureclass(out_path, out_name, {geometry_type}, 
                   {template}, {has_m}, {has_z}, 
                   {spatial_reference}, {config_keyword}, 
                   {spatial_grid_1}, {spatial_grid_2}, 
                   {spatial_grid_3})
```

### *what are the parameters?*

---

# Substituting the spatial reference object for the string

```python
import arcpy
out_path = "C:/Data"
out_name = "lines.shp"
prjfile = "C:/Data/streams.prj"
spatialref = arcpy.SpatialReference(prjfile)
arcpy.CreateFeatureclass_management(out_path, out_name, "POLYLINE", 
                                    "", "", "", spatialref)
```
### *MUCH easier using the SpatialReference object than using actual string value contained in the .prj file*

---

# other stuff we're not going to cover in class

See your textbook for:
- tool messages
- dealing with licenses
- spatial references
- environments

---

# Getting by with a little help (from our ESRI friends)

- Main support page for ArcGIS Pro is http://pro.arcgis.com/en/pro-app/help
- The Python tab brings up the ArcGIS Pro Python reference, which includes the official documentation of all the functionality of ArcPy. 
- All ArcPy functions and classes are listed and described in detail, with sample code
- Separate sections on the various modules of ArcPy ```(arcpy.da, arcpy.ia, arcpy.sa, and arcpy.mp)```

---

# Today's in-class exercise

### *Before you start, create a generalized workflow/process/pseudocode*

Using your ```week03inclass``` data, calculate:
1. The number of municipalities in Lancaster County
2. Which county has more municipalities? Lancaster or Sarpy?
3. How many 303d streams are (at least partially) inside of Lincoln?

###

4. If you finish above, then revisit last week's optional tasks


---

# For next class

- Readings
     - Wilson et al. 2020. Come with **at least one** (more is ok/great) discussion question. We are going to discuss the paper as in a seminar
- Practice!
- Lab 01 is due tomorrow



